As we all know, happy families in various countries are happy in their own way. A happy English family has its own peculiarities. First, the basis of it is the woman, who, at the same time, prefers not to underline this fact.

          Historically, women have occupied a special place in the world of the English. No other country has given birth to so many female writers! One of the few in France was George Sand, who used a male pseudonym and preferred to wear trousers. Only specialists in the field of literature can even name a female writer from Germany or Italy. England has given birth to a pleiad of popular and good writers whose works are alive and read to this day. Witty Jane Austin, strict Charlotte Bronte and her strange sisters, the scandalous Mary Shelley with her “Frankenstein”, Elisabeth Gaskell, who laid bare social evils, the intellectual Virginia Wolf. And these are just some of them, the ones that everybody recognizes and knows instantly.

          Then there are the Queens on the English throne. It is sufficient to name but three of them, each of whom was a whole era, and gave her name to that era. Elizabeth I, who ruled at the start of the country`s supremacy over the world, Victoria, who confirmed the country as a great world power and who rallied society, and finally the current Queen, Elizabeth II who is still to a great extent an important, consolidating authority in the country. Also Margaret Thatcher, who was not the queen but who reigned and left an indelible mark on English history. How many other female prime ministers of that caliber can you recall from continental Europe?

          Interestingly enough, English women do not seem to suffer from the “women` s rights” complex that is characteristic of other western societies. They do, of course, have feminists, who were even some of the first in the world to make a stand for their rights. But that was long ago when practically nobody was doing it. Nowadays “feminist societies” mainly get together in order to have lunch together or to have a chat over a cup of tea. All the same, it is English society that has longer than anywhere else retained the traditions of dividing up a group by sex after dinners. The men stay to smoke, indulge in a drink and talk about politics while the women go off to drink tea and gossip. It is also in England that women take not only their husband` s surname after marriage, but also his first name as well and become Mrs. John Smith (which comes as somewhat of a surprise for the outsiders).

          The typical English restraint concerns their attitude to sex. .Sex and everything connected with it has, for a long time, been considered to be something best to be avoided. A book on good manners from the mid-nineteenth century explained that even “Compliments are inadmissible in English society, unless they are so delicately put as to be hardly discernible”. A modern book on etiquette recommends that those in love should refrain from open displays of emotion and hints of the intimate relations that exist between them as “it may embarrass some people. The greatest intimacy that is permissible in public is to walk in public hand in hand or arm in arm, a light passionless kiss on the cheek, an embrace upon parting.

          One of the most important English principles can be summed up as follows: “we did not come into this world in order to get pleasure.” It is precisely the basis for many of the distinctive features of their character and way of life. It all starts right at the beginning, from the birth and upbringing of a child. One needs to be firm with children, and the higher up the social ladder you are, the more firm you need to be. It is not unusual to find that in a rich English home with an enormous living room, gigantic bedroom and imposing cabinet, the so-called children` s room is a miserable little room somewhere in the attic. This is done deliberately, from considerations of principle, so as not to spoil them but harden them.

          The system of boarding schools is still popular in England, with boys and girls sometimes still going to separate schools particularly for children from aristocratic and rich families. The discipline and order that reigns in them to this day are a sort of mixture between a prison, a barracks and a monastery and they are considered to be a fitting environment in which to bring up a real Englishman.

          There is an interesting English saying “Children should be seen but not heard”. The doors to English pubs often have the sign “No children, no dogs” and whereas they might on occasion make exception for the dogs, they never do for children. The typical question which they all ask of children “What do you want to be when you grow up, young man?” leads them to the idea that childhood is simply a period that one has to live through in order to become a normal, that is , grown up person.

          The older generation in England finds itself in a similar position.  

          A nineteenth century book of good manners noted: “It is a cruel rule that altogether excludes very old and very young people from dinners; but the “dumb” are out of place at them as much as the over-loquacious. Very literal people, too, who cannot take a joke, do not add to general enjoyment of a feast”.

          Maybe this is why elderly people living in England value their independence so highly. They will do anything so as not to become a burden to their children and, in essence, remain free from their influence. One of the nice things about living in England is their equivalent of the old people`s home, with your personal items and belongings, but with the advantage of having round the clock medical care, the possibility to talk with people of your age, and an entertainment programme.

          The English seem to become even more active once they retire, occupied with their garden, taking up a hobby, or traveling round England or even abroad.

          Finally the last but certainly not the least important members of the English family are the pets. While the children are banished to some of the worst places in the house (for their upbringing, you understand!), a dog or a cat will probably have the most honoured place. A walk with the dog is always a pleasant, if rather one-sided, conversation full of gentleness and warmth. The English love cats with all their hearts. An interest in horses is not something that everybody can afford. Nevertheless, here as well we can see more love and warmth towards them than in relations between humans. Horse races in England are an event on a national scale.

          The law about the proper treatment of animals appeared in England at the beginning of the nineteenth century, the first country in the world to adopt such a law.